Online Submission ID: vis-1279
SAND2009-1978C
Dynamic, non-overlapping label placement for three-dimensional
point-features
Category: Research
Abstract— This paper presents a technique for the automatic placement of non-overlapping, screen-axis-aligned rectangular labels
– which may include icons, text, etc. – while maximizing placed label relevance, frame-to-frame coherence, and interactive rendering
rates. Past papers have focused on labels with anchors in 2-dimensional space; this paper addresses label anchors placed in 3-
dimensional space and then projected to 2-dimensional screen space. Because projection changes the spacing between anchors
from frame to frame, a static placement of the labels is not possible. This type of problem occurs when examining scientific simulation
results, rendering virtual globes, and many other situations.
Coherence and relevance are maximized by placing labels retrieved from an octree that orders labels by both position and priority. By
processing previously-rendered labels first and traversing the octree carefully, labels with the highest priority are always considered
first and when overlap is detected – using screen-space binning – the lower priority label is omitted. When rendering 3-dimensional
scenes where label density is extremely high, such as virtual globes, the set of labels for a given area is generally large compared
to the number of labels that may be placed in that same area, so efficient overlap detection and early termination of placement (as
opposed to attempting to place all labels) are paramount to maintaining interactive frame rates.
Index Terms—3-d label placement, scientific visualization, information visualization.
1 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Label placement is hard. Really hard. NP hard [4], which people with
the best digital watches assure us is just Too Hard To Contemplate.
Only really good heuristics can save us and no one is sure they exist.
But as it turns out, labels are quite useful so we cannot render images
without labels and pretend that there’s really no problem and you’re
just daft if you can’t see that it’s a map of Tokyo and not London.
Recently, there has been a significant amount of work for placing
labels at 2-dimensional point features, in both interactive and non-
interactive settings. This has caused much rejoicing among people
with 2-dimensional point-feature labels but has left people with 3-
dimensional point-feature labels feeling bitter and unloved. This turns
out to be a lot of people since we live in a universe with 3 spatial
dimensions. Without labels, it can be difficult to examine meshes,
simulation results, medical data such as bone or tissue surfaces recon-
structed from volumetric scans, and virtual globes to name a few.
The main problem with labels anchored at points in 3 or higher di-
mensions is that the projections used to map these points to a display
move them relative to one another in a way that does not preserve ra-
tios as the space is rotated or perspective is applied. This means that
not only can small changes in the projection cause labels that have a
fixed size on the display to overlap, but there is no single factor that
can be used to parameterize the way in which these effects will mani-
fest themselves. Additionally, labels anchored in a higher-dimensional
space may be obscured by other geometry in the scene and dislaying
the labels even when the point they are anchored to is obscured can be
confusing. This has lead to 2 classes of techniques: using varying-size
labels (for example by texturing labels onto the geometry they are as-
sociated with), and using fixed-size screen-space labels at a disadvan-
tage (either allowing overlap or allowing labels to appear and disap-
pear as they come into conflict – also known as popping). Both classes
of techniques have their problems. We hope to ameliorate some of the
disadvantages of the fixed-size class by changing the way the problem
is stated; traditionally, the goal of label placement algorithms has been
to maximize the number of labels placed. This approach is well-suited
to static placement for cartography but for interactive applications with
label anchors embedded in a dimension 3 or higher space, it only ex-
acerbates popping.
While we are not as clever as the 2-dimensional label placers, we
hope that this paper will make people with 3-dimensional point-feature
labels feel better about life in general and their labels in particular.
The sections that follow survey the existing literature, describe an al-
gorithm for placing 3-dimensional point-feature labels, show how it is
fast enough – both theoretically and practically – to be used in interac-
tive applications and then conclude by pointing out a lot of work that
we didn’t have time to finish but might one day impress people with
digital watches.
2 LITERATURE SURVEY
Of the work focused on labels with varying screen-space size, the most
relevant is text scaffolding [6] and the texture impostors of [11]. Text
scaffolding is focused on area labels, and textures labels onto the as-
sociated areas. It accounts for high curvature and holes in the surface
to be labeled by generating an implicit proxy surface to label. The
texture impostors employed by Petrovic et al. [11] are also for label-
ing areas, and in this application specifically brain fibers identified
through diffusion-tensor imaging. Texturing approaches do not easily
extend to labeling point features and also forces labels to be sized no
larger than the underlying area being annotated. If an area is important
but also small relative to other geometry in the scene this can be prob-
lematic. Also, while it is not a significant disadvantage for interactive
applications, when the area being labeled is at an angle to the viewer
the label can be difficult to read.
The remainder of the section is focused on fixed-size screen-space
labeling. Illustrative layout [3] provides an algorithm for external lay-
out, where labels are always placed outside of the portion of the screen
containing the features to be labeled. This produces aesthetic labels
but generally few labels can be displayed at a time. Also, it is un-
clear how models with large variations in scale would be labeled since
zooming in to see small features could easily leave no room on the
screen to place labels.
The problem of generating a set of internal non-overlapping point-
feature labels has been addressed most thoroughly in the literature for
cartographic label placement. A more complete overview of this cor-
pus is provided by Wolff [1] and Christensen et al. [5]; we mention
only a few works here.
One theme common to many cartographic text placement algo-
rithms [5, 13, 10, 8] is to allow the label anchor gravity – used to
denote where the label rectangle is located with respect to the point
feature – to vary in order to place a larger fraction of the labels avail-
able. For interactive applications with 3-dimensional point features,
this can lead to excessive popping between frames since it increases
the density of labels above the maximum provided by a single, static
gravity per label. Where the density is high, the resulting set of placed
labels becomes more sensitive to the order in which labels are consid-
1
ered for placement.
Been et al. [4] present a heuristic for point-feature labels embed-
ded in a 2-dimensional space: by giving labels a priority – a unique
partial ordering, in fact – they are able to perform an O(n2) prepro-
cessing step to place labels, where n is the number of point-features.
The placement includes a range of zoom factors over which each label
is active (rendered). The active set will never overlap and high pri-
ority labels will be visible over large ranges of scale. This technique
provides label placements with a lot of desirable traits: there is no pop-
ping, interactive programs can quickly determine what labels to place,
and the same labels will always be rendered when a particular area is
revisited. It does not appear that this technique can generalize to 3-D
since the preprocessing stage would have to produce an active range
for each label as a function of 6 parameters (3 focal point coordinates,
2 view angles, and a scale factor) instead of just a scale factor. Even if
such a function could be quickly computed, efficient storage would be
problematic.
Mote [10] presents a technique for label placement that does not
require any preprocessing, instead using a screen-space subdivision to
quickly eliminate overlaps. The conclusion notes it could be gener-
alized to 3 dimensions however this would likely produce significant
popping since the goal is to place as many labels as possible, since it
attempts to use alternative anchor points to increase label density when
the default anchor gravity does not lead to placement, and since it does
not order or prioritize labels.
Finally, Luboshik et al. [9] present a method for 2-dimensional label
placement that uses a particle system to prevent not only label-label
overlap but label-feature overlap. As with other systems, the method is
focused on maximizing the number of labels placed so small changes
in configuration between frames can lead to popping.
3 ALGORITHM DESIGN
This section presents a problem statement, outlines data structures, and
finally describes the algorithm we use to place labels
3.1 Problem Definition
We contend that the problem statement for interactive label placement
– especially in dimensions above 2 – is not the same as the static la-
bel placement problem encountered by many cartographers [13, 2, 1].
Specifically, the goal is not to place as many labels in each frame as
possible but rather to (1) maximize the chance that labels with high
priority are placed in consecutive frames and (2) provide an intuitive
way for users to quickly access the label of any feature of interest. The
problem definition is different because interactive exploration allows
people to develop a mental model of a dataset that is richer than what is
displayed on any one frame. By providing consecutive frames with the
most important labels as landmarks, users can tie their mental model
to the display.
To address point (1), we must carefully define priority. In addition
to any application-specific meaning, priority should also include the
distance from the camera to the label. Since the camera is adjusted
from frame to frame, uniquely pre-ordering labels by priority is not
possible. We must assume there are enough labels that sorting them
all by distance to the camera each frame is not feasible. Furthermore,
reconsidering a label’s position once it has been placed would turn
label placement into an exponential-time task. With no adjustments
allowed, labels considered early-on for placement have a much higher
chance of being drawn than those considered late in the process. Thus,
in order to preserve as much frame-to-frame coherence as possible,
we would like to traverse labels in approximately the same order from
one frame to the next so that labels placed early in one frame are also
placed early in the following frame. High-priority labels should ap-
pear as early as possible during the traversal. However, placing labels
in nearly the same order each frame conflicts with the desire to have la-
bels nearer the camera considered first, since the arrangement of label
anchors may change from frame to frame.
To address point (2),we must carefully define how labels are ac-
cessed. “Access” need not mean that each frame should exhaustively
Fig. 1. An illustration of the label hierarchy (shown on the right as a
quadtree instead of an octree for clarity). The root node is at the top
and the leaves are at the bottom. Both position and priority are implicit
in the binary tree structure that organizes input labels. Each node (a)
of the hierarchy contains a priority-sorted list (b) of references to input
label anchors (c) which each have coordinates (x, y, z) and size (w, h).
enumerate as many labels as possible in the hopes that labels of inter-
est to the user will appear. While labels are important to interactive
visualizations, they are frequently rendered with other geometry that
is also important to the task at hand as Luboshik et al. [9] note. La-
bels should not be present in such large quantities that other visual
information is obscured. Interactive applications allow the user con-
trol over what is displayed and this should extend to labels as well.
High framerates provide an opportunity for the user to indicate desir-
able and undesirable information and the rendering system to respond
by tailoring the content appropriately.
As a final note on how interactive applications differ from the tra-
ditional cartographic layout problem, many current placement algo-
rithms traverse the entire set of features to be labeled each time a
frame as rendered. For static images, this is productive but for in-
teractive applications it is not. Consider the United States National
Geospatial-Intelligence Agency’s list of place names [12]. It contains
approximately 6.77 ×106 place names with an associated latitude and
longitude coordinates and takes 900 MiB uncompressed on disk. Iter-
ating over all of these records once per frame is unlikely to be produc-
tive, even when every label might be visible because the entire Earth
is in frame.
3.2 Data structures
Now consider what data structures and algorithms might satisfy the
constraints mentioned above. Clearly, some sort of spatial search
structure is required in order to consider distance from the camera.
Storing labels in the leaf nodes of this search structure would improve
the algorithm’s ability to display labels proximal to the camera and ter-
minate early but would not, on its own, provide any way to prioritize
placement. However, a hybrid approach is possible where all the nodes
of a search structure – as opposed to just the leaves – contain data and
labels within a given node of the search structure are sorted by priority.
Figure 1 illustrates the concept with a quadtree (instead of an octree
that would be required for 3-dimensional label anchors) for clarity:
input datasets of label anchor points are inserted into a d-dimensional
binary tree with anchors of more important labels appearing higher in
the tree. The number of labels referenced by each node is maintained
close to a fixed target Nt so that the size of the input can be tuned to
keep framerates interactive.
Traversing the octree in a breadth-first search with nodes nearer the
camera visited first approximates the goal of placing labels nearer the
camera first (but it is possible that labels in neighboring tree nodes
are slightly closer to the camera). And traversing the octree breadth-
2
Online Submission ID: vis-1279
first approximates the goal of placing higher priority labels first (but
it is possible that labels from neighboring tree nodes with a higher
priority are placed earlier). Normally, breadth-first tree traversal is
considered inefficient since it requires more storage than depth-first
traversal. However, we can terminate early by limiting the number of
tree nodes visited to some Nmax and this will also fix the maximum
amount of storage required to traverse the portion of the tree of inter-
est. Finally, we can selectively prune the descent of the octree to avoid
nodes which, when projected to the screen will take up a very small
space and thus not be likely to be a source of labels with high priority
whose placement will be coherent from frame to frame.
In addition to creating an octree of references to input points, some
mechanism for detecting overlaps of labels already placed with candi-
date labels must be developed. Simply dividing screen space into a set
of tiles – each of which holds a list of placed labels that overlap it –
is a simple approach and has worked well. The tiles should be large
enough that most labels overlap few tiles (to avoid storing many copies
of a single rectangle) but small enough that not many labels overlap a
given tile (to avoid the cost of comparing many placed label rectan-
gles to each candidate label). In theory there are problems that might
arise with such a simple approach. Edelsbrunner [7] describes a more
sophisticated approach for detecting intersections of d-dimensional
rectangles that requires O(nlog2d−1 n) storage, O(nlog2d−1 n) time to
construct, and O(nlog2d−1 n+ m) time to query where n is the number
of rectangles in the structure and m is the number of intersection tests.
We expect m > n since more labels will be considered than placed
but in the worst case n would dominate and the cost would approach
O(nlog3 n). In practice, we have found no need to incorporate this
technique and use tiles 128 ×128 pixels in size.
3.3 Algorithm
There are 3 main algorithms that produce and utilize the data structures
of the previous section: octree creation, label placement, and octree
iteration (which is invoked by the label placement algorithm). We will
discuss each in turn.
Algorithm 1 creates an octree given a set of point features F with
priority. If no priority is specified, then the list of features is assumed
to already be in sorted form. As each node is added, it is possible
that we must descend the entire octree in order to insert it. The octree
size is proportional to log|F|and we must perform this insertion for
each entry of F so the total cost of O(|F|log|F|). Sorting is also an
O(|F|log|F|) operation in the average case, making this the overall
complexity. We use Nt = 32. Note that Nt , tile size B= 128, and
another parameter Nmax introduced later are all related.
Algorithm 2 performs label placement by iterating over some sub-
set of the octree nodes and attempts to place each label referenced by
the octree node. If point features include a normal vector (for instance
because they are points on a surface of interest), then the normal vector
is used to cull labels when the normal points away from the camera. If
depth buffer testing is enabled, then each point feature’s depth into the
view plane is tested against the depth buffer. If the feature is signifi-
cantly behind the depth buffer then the label is not placed. Finally, the
label gravity is used to determine the screen-space coordinates of the
label rectangle and if no previously-placed labels interfere, the label is
placed.
Now we’ll discuss iterating over some subset of octree nodes to
obtain a list of labels to consider for placement. Each octree node
contains a list of references to labels sorted in order of descending
priority. The octree is traversed breadth-first by maintaining a queue
Q of nodes yet to be visited. When iteration over the labels is initiated,
the top-level octree node is added to Q. As the labels in one octree
node are exhausted, the nodes children are pushed onto the tail of Q
and a new node is popped from the front of Q as shown in Algorithm 3.
At most Nmax octree nodes will be traversed for a single frame and
since the number of labels per octree node is a constant, this fixes the
input size to be considered and helps maintain interactive framerates.
As can be seen in Algorithm 3, not all children of a node are added
to Q. Descending into octree nodes that are too far from the camera
will likely yield no additional placed labels but certainly increase the
Algorithm 1 The algorithm used to initialize the octree.
Sort the list F of point features by descending priority.
for all point features f ∈F do
n ←the toplevel octree node
while |n|≥Nt do
if n has children then
n ←the child of n containing f
else
Add children to n
n ←the child of n containing f
Break from the loop.
end if
end while
Insert a reference to f into n
end for
Algorithm 2 The algorithm used to place labels for a frame.
Compute λ Btan α
p
2
2
from Equation 1.
V ←camera eye-aim vector
Prepare screen-space tiles T and initialize label iterator I
Read depth buffer from video card
if label anchors have normal vectors then
ν ←true
else
ν ←false
end if
while I not at end do
if ν then
n ←normal for label I
end if
if not ν or n·V < 0 then
x ←coordinates for label I
x∗←screen space coordinates of x
g ←anchor gravity for label I
(w, h)←width and height of label I
if depth buffer does not occlude (x∗) then
if g has left gravity then
ll[0]←ul[0]←x∗[0]
lr[0]←ur[0]←x∗[0] + w
else if g has right gravity then
ll[0]←ul[0]←x∗[0]−w
lr[0]←ur[0]←x∗[0]
else
ll[0]←ul[0]←x∗[0]−w/2
lr[0]←ur[0]←x∗[0] + w/2
end if
if g has top gravity then
ll[1]←lr[1]←x∗[1]
ul[1]←ur[1]←x∗[1] + h
else if g has bottom gravity then
ll[1]←lr[1]←x∗[1]−h
ul[1]←ur[1]←x∗[1]
else
ll[1]←lr[1]←x∗[1]−h/2
ul[1]←ur[1]←x∗[1] + h/2
end if
if ll[0] ≤W and lr[0] ≥0 and ll[1] ≤H and ur[1] ≥0 then
if no tile in T overlaps the rectangle ll, ur then
Insert ll, ur into T and place current label
end if
end if
end if
end if
I ←next(I)
end while
3
Fig. 2. Children of octree nodes whose circumsphere is significantly
smaller than a screen-space bin will not be visited during traversal.
amount of work. Here we develop a criterion for deciding whether or
not to descend an octree node during label placement. Consider an
octree node with edges of length c. A circumsphere of the node then
has radius r = c √3
2 . As Figure 2 illustrates, the projected size of the
sphere on the screen will be a function of the distance d from the center
of the node to the camera, the view angle α, and the size p, in pixels,
of the viewport1. Also, since we will be bucketing placed labels into
tiles that are B pixels on a side, we are interested in comparing the size
of the sphere to the number of tiles it spans, not the number of pixels
it spans. Thus we choose not to descend any octree node for which
c2 <
λ tan α
2
2
p/B
d2 (1)
holds, where λ is a scale factor for the relative size of a screen-space
tile to an octree node’s circumsphere. We use λ= 0.1. The quantity
in parenthesis is precomputed once per frame, so this check is efficient
to perform.
Algorithm 3 The algorithm used to iterate over labels in the octree.
n ←the current octree node
i ←the current label index in n
L ←the number of labels in n
if i + 1 < L then
i ←i + 1
return label i
end if
while queue Q of octree nodes is not empty do
n ←front(Q)
pop front(Q)
Ntraversed ←Ntraversed + 1
if n meets criterion of Equation 1 then
Prepare a list L of non-empty, visible children of n
Sort L by distance to the camera
Truncate L such that |Q|+ |L|+ Ntraversed ≤Nmax
Q ←{Q, L}
end if
if n has labels then
i ←0
return label i
end if
end while
Mark the iteration as complete
return an invalid label
1We assume α and p both refer to either the horizontal or vertical viewport
angle and size, respectively
|F| Depth buffer testing enabled
Startup Placement Render
100 1000 10000 100000 1000000 0.001 0.007307 0.02371
0.006 0.036267 0.07713
0.068 0.183327 0.25123
0.918 0.417851 0.59176
11.405 0.685168 0.93429
Depth buffer testing disabled
100 1000 10000 100000 1000000 0 0.000901 0.01766
0.006 0.004129 0.03421
0.065 0.022139 0.09013
0.925 0.049455 0.22343
10.375 0.079208 0.32569
Table 1. Time, in seconds, required to process a varying number N of
labels on a 2.7 GHz Intel Core i7 machine with a GeForce GTX 280
video card. Labels averaged 6 characters in width.
To determine an appropriate value for Nmax in Algorithm 3, we must
consider several factors; assuming point features are uniformly dis-
tributed in space, each level of the octree we add multiplies the number
of nodes to visit by 8. Descending a level of the tree also divides c by
2. Assume for a moment that d is constant and set to the view plane
distance (or that we are performing parallel instead of perspective pro-
jection); then the number of octree nodes along an axis of screen space
is proportional to the number of screen-space tiles divided by λ . If λ
is approximately 0.125=
1
23 and one octree node exactly covers one
screen-space tile then we must descend 3 levels before Equation 1 ter-
minates the descent. If we have a window with 8 ×8= 64 tiles, each
128×128 pixels, for a total window size of 1024×1024 and the octree
exactly covers the entire window, then we must descend 3 additional
levels to get the point where one octree node covers one tile. When
zoomed in so that the octree is larger than the entire screen, some chil-
dren of the top-level node will not be visible and a small constant is
added to the number of nodes to traverse. When the octree does not
initially fill the entire screen, then fewer nodes must be traversed.
For the given λ , p, and B, the worst case of 6 levels would have
to be descended leaving Nmax = 86 = 262, 144. For larger Nmax, it is
as if there is no bound on the total number of nodes processed – only
the screen size of the nodes would cause early termination. For smaller
Nmax, the constraint on node screen size is only active for distant nodes
while the overall depth of traversal is limited by Nmax. In practice,
reasonable results are obtained with Nmax = 83 = 512. This can be
explained by comparing the total area of all the labels at an octree node
compared to the area of a screen-space tile. With B= 128, the tiles
have an area of 16, 384 pixels2. If labels are generally 12 pixels tall
and 6 characters wide (approximately 72 pixels), then a node would
only need 16, 384/12/72= 19 labels to fill the entire tile. We use
32 labels per octree node, which is generally more than the area of a
single tile.
4 IMPLEMENTATION
We have implemented the algorithms from the previous section and
now briefly present their performance. Table 1 illustrates the perfor-
mance both with and without depth-buffer occlusion testing enabled.
Generally, depth-buffer testing slows down the overall process by a
factor of 2 to 3. When |F|is large, most of this additional cost appears
to be due to increased placement time and not increased rendering
time. This is likely because the occlusion test is performed early in the
process. We suspect that moving it after the tests for overlap with la-
bels already placed that some time could be saved since fewer random
accesses to the depth buffer would be required. When |F|is low, the
overall frame time is dominated by rendering labels and performing
the depth buffer readback. The test dataset is a randomly-distributed
set of point features with randome text labels an average of 6 charac-
ters wide.
In addition to testing with uniform random inputs, we have gener-
ated pictures (and in the online version animations) of the placement
4
Online Submission ID: vis-1279
algorithm running on simulation data. Figure 3 shows an example of
the label placer in action on an unstructured mesh. One interesting
application of placing labels onto simulation data is identifying cells
where a particular behavior is observed. In the figure, points in the tri-
angulation of several isocontours of temperature are labeled with the
cell number which generated the isocontour in the original simulation
mesh. This makes it easy to identify where the temperature reached
a certain value without having to perform several thresholding opera-
tions or pick individual cells to examine their nodal values.
5 CONCLUSION
Future work includes extending label placement to distributed-data
settings where the dataset is too large for any single machine and ren-
dering must be performed using image compositing. An interesting
sub-case is when a large dataset is rendered to a large, tiled display
where screen-space binning may not be efficient enough to be interac-
tive.
Another interesting case to consider is how rotated text, text along
a curve, or labels and features of any shape might be accommodated
in a manner similar to Luboshik et al. [9].
It may be possible to provide even more frame-to-frame coherence
by copying references to label anchors near an octree node boundary
into neighboring octree nodes at the same level in the hierarchy. This
“smudging” of the labels would improve the chance of a label being
placed even as an octree node containing it gets pruned by the iterator
due to movement or a size change due to projection. It would incur
additional cost since the same label anchor might be considered for
placement several times.
Finally, we have not implemented a “mouseover” iterator that
places labels directly under the mouse before attempting to place any
other labels. This would be a significant usability improvement, but
several details are important: when the mouse is above several coinci-
dent label anchors, both priority and proximity must considered during
placement. One solution would be to displace anchors and draw leader
lines from the label to the original anchor location, however the dis-
placement must be chosen carefully to prevent label overlap. Also, in
this situation it is important to avoid placing labels directly under the
mouse cursor where they are unreadable.
REFERENCES
[1] Map labeling bibliography, 2008. [Online; accessed 18-March-2008].
http://i11www.iti.uni-karlsruhe.de/map-labeling/
bibliography/.
[2] P. K. Agarwal, M. van Kreveld, and S. Suri. Label placement by max-
imum independent set in rectangles. In Proceedings of the 9th Cana-
dian Conference on Computational Geometry (CCCG’97), pages 233–
238, 1997.
[3] K. Ali, K. Hartmann, and T. Strothotte. Label layout for interactive 3D
illustrations. The Journal of WSCG, 13, January 31-February 4 2005.
WSCG2005.
[4] K. Been, E. Daiches, and C. Yap. Dynamic map labeling. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5), 2006.
[5] J. Christensen, J. Marks, and S. Shieber. An empirical study of algo-
rithms for point-feature label placement. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
14(3):203–232, 1995.
[6] G. Cipriano and M. Gleicher. Text scaffolds for effective surface labeling.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, 14(6):1675–
1682, 2008.
[7] H. Edelsbrunner. A new approach to rectangle intersections: Part i. Intern
J. Computer Math, 13:209–219, 1983.
[8] H. Freeman. Label-EZ – software for automated cartographic text place-
ment. white paper, 2008. [Online; accessed 24-March-2009]. http:
//www.maptext.com/lbz-literature.shtml.
[9] M. Luboschik, H. Schumann, and H. Cords. Particle-based labeling:
Fast point-feature labeling without obscuring other visual features. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, 14(6):1237–1244,
2008.
[10] K. Mote. Fast point-feature label placement for dynamic visualizations.
Information Visualization, 6:249–260, 2007.
Fig. 3. These images are of a reacting flow simulation inside a cylindri-
cal mixing chamber which has been clipped with a plane. Isocontours of
temperature are shown and, centered on each triangle of the isocontour
is a label identifying which cell in the simulation generated the isocon-
tour. Because no priority is provided, the index into the list of isocontour
triangles is used.
5
[11] V. Petrovic, J. Fallon, and F. Kuester. Visualizing whole-brain DTI trac-
tography with GPU-based tuboids and LoD management. IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, 13(6):1488–1495, Nov.
2007.
[12] United States National Geospatial-Intellice Agency. Country files, 2008.
[Online; accessed 24-March-2009]. http://earth-info.nga.
mil/gns/html/namefiles.htm.
[13] F. Wagner and A. Wolff. A combinatorial framework for map labeling.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1547:316–331, 1998. Proceedings
of the 6th International Symposium on Graph Drawing (GD98).
6